Chapter 12

A return to the chromosome theory of inheritence. What is a chromosome? Condensed DNA. When are the visible? During metaphase. They are like 'wound spaghetti' of chromatin around a centromere. 
The anatomy of the chromosome: 
	Centromere: In the middle of the chromosome binidnig the branches of the chromosome outtward.
	Telomere: These are the sticky ends that attach to spindles and allow the chromosomes to be identified. They also shorten over time.
	Origin of replicattion (ORI): A gene has to come from somewhere ®
	Autonomously Replicating Sequences (ARS): Permit replication of plasmids in yeast cells, generally 16 pairs.
	Scaffold-associated regions (SARs): Sites
	chromatin is actually made of **two types**
		Heterochromatin(condensed) - A transcriptionally inactive type which has two classes.
			Constitutive - Affects genes, PEV, Barr Bosies (Xist gene, RNA gene)
			Facilitative == CH_3; COCH_3
		Euchruchromatin(decondensed) - A transctionally active type
	Chromatin is ⅓DNA, ⅓histones, & ⅓proteins.
	Histones: small, + charged, & highly conserved.
		½ of chromatin by weight.
	Histones have five types: H1, H2A, H2B, H3, & H4
		H1 - Secures 'naked DNA' to form nucleosomes w/ nucleosome core and 60bp of linker DNA.
		H2A - Part of nucleosome core.
		H2B - Part of nucleosome core.
		H3 - Part of nucleosome core.
		H4 - Part of nucleosome core.
	Non-Histones:
		structure (scaffolding)
		replication (polymerase)
		segregation (kinetochores)
		transcription (RNA poly)
	DNA wraps twice around nucleosomes, and is therefore condensed, and then characterized as heterochromatin. (and is 100 Angstroms)
	These nucleosomess are then coiled further into supercoils and are now 300 Angstroms with six nucleosomes per turn.
	* To investigate further: Figure 12.13b is a good example of position-effect variegation (PEV) as proof of faculative heterochromatin.
	Heterochromatin formation between female mammals can vary and be mosaic at X-linked genes
		* In females heterozygous for x-linked mutation. (Caleco Cats)
	
	DNase hyper sensitive sites - promote transcribed genes as more susceeptible to nuclease digestion than promoters of non-transcribed genes.

	Function of centromeres:
		1. Hold sister chromatids together. (cohesin)
		2. Attachment sites for chromosome segregation.
	What is cohesin? Is a binding protein in mitosis.
		Shugoshin prevents degredation of cohesin in meiosis.
	Centromere characteristics.
		Tandem repeats for 5-300 strands.

